24766

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

Fusing Ice Surface Temperature With the AI4Arctic
Dataset for Improved Deep Learning-Based
Sea Ice Mapping
Lily de Loë , Student Member, IEEE, David A. Clausi , Senior Member, IEEE,
and K. Andrea Scott , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Arctic sea ice mapping is vital for supporting marine
navigation, climate monitoring, and efforts by northern communities to adapt to variable ice conditions. Automated mapping approaches can leverage freely accessible satellite data to supplement
navigational ice charts, improve operational forecasting, and produce high-resolution sea ice parameter estimates. The AI4Arctic
dataset enables deep learning-based mapping using synthetic aperture radar (SAR), passive microwave (PM), and reanalysis data.
However, SAR and PM can struggle to resolve ice features due to
ambiguous textures, atmospheric effects, and sensor limitations. To
provide complementary data, an 84-scene Visible Infrared Imager
Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) dataset is co-registered with AI4Arctic
to evaluate whether ice surface temperature (IST) measurements
can improve estimation of sea ice concentration (SIC), stage of
development, and floe size. Input- and feature-level fusion methods, based on the U-Net architecture, are explored. Models are
evaluated using the SIC R2 coefficient and SOD/FLOE F1-score,
as well as predicted sea ice maps. In addition, an alternative SIC
accuracy score is introduced to assist with evaluating marginal ice
predictions. Incorporating IST improves performance across all
models compared to the AI4Arctic baseline; this includes singleencoder, dual-encoder, and multidecoder U-Nets. Results highlight
significant improvements in the prediction of open water under
conditions with low-incidence angle, high atmospheric moisture,
and wind roughening. Overall, the best performing dual-encoder
model, DUE-Net-V, improves predictions by 2.18–5.01% across all
metrics, relative to the baseline. These results support integrating
IST in deep learning workflows and highlight the potential for
next-generation thermal-infrared sensors to improve automated
sea ice mapping.
Index Terms—Data fusion, deep learning, microwave data,
synthetic aperture radar (SAR), sea ice, thermal data, U-Net.

I. INTRODUCTION
UTOMATED sea ice mapping is a valuable tool for
navigating changing Arctic conditions, with the potential to support several strategic goals. Diminishing ice extent

A

Received 4 June 2025; revised 28 August 2025; accepted 11 September 2025.
Date of publication 16 September 2025; date of current version 3 October 2025.
This work was supported in part by Environment and Climate Change Canada,
with compute resources provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada,
and in part by the Vector Scholarship in Artificial Intelligence, provided through
the Vector Institute. (Corresponding author: Lily de Loë)
Lily de Loë and David A. Clausi are with the Department of Systems Design
Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G5, Canada (e-mail:
lcbdeloe@uwaterloo.ca; dclausi@uwaterloo.ca).
K. Andrea Scott is with the Department of Mechanical & Mechatronics
Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G5, Canada (e-mail:
ka3scott@uwaterloo.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSTARS.2025.3610260

contributes to increasing variability in Arctic conditions [1],
[2]. This variability, combined with longer shipping seasons,
necessitates the development of automated mapping approaches
to supplement ice charts, and support strategic planning with
shorter lead times [3]. In addition, changing ice dynamics make
conditions unpredictable, which increases the risks of encountering hazards. Data pipelines can be created so that remote
northern communities can leverage automated mapping and
combine it with traditional knowledge to support Indigenous-led
community initiatives [4]. Further, Arctic amplification contributes to accelerated warming in this region [5]. Decreasing ice
extent impacts Arctic ecosystems, where sea ice acts as habitat
for endemic species [6]. Timely, high-resolution mapping approaches can assist in monitoring freeze-up and break-up trends,
as well as ice extent, supporting climate research [7].
Advancements in sea ice mapping are increasingly driven
by machine learning approaches, which leverage a wealth of
free, publicly available remote sensing data. These approaches
primarily leverage synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and passive
microwave (PM) data. Empirical, algorithm-based products exist, which predominantly predict sea ice concentration (SIC).
This includes daily SIC maps derived from PM data [8], from
fusing PM and thermal-infrared data [9], or from fusing optical
and SAR data [10]. SAR-derived products also exist, which offer
finer resolution estimates [11]. Recent advancements in deep
learning have demonstrated promising results in estimating the
three sea ice parameters relevant to ice charts: SIC, stage of
development (SOD), and floe size (FLOE) [12]. These studies
leverage convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13], [14], UNet architectures, [15], [16], [17], [18], and U-Net variants [19].
The AI4Arctic dataset [20], introduced in 2022, supports
the continued development of deep learning-based mapping
approaches by providing co-registered Sentinel-1 SAR, AMSR2
brightness temperature (BT), ERA-5 reanalysis data, and ice
charts. SAR measurements are not reliant on reflected solar
radiation, and boast a spatial resolution that balances sensitivity
to changes in ice conditions with swath size and data storage
considerations. These instruments measure the backscatter coefficient of the emitted radar pulse; surface roughness, incidence angle, and the physical and dielectric properties of the
target medium all impact this measurement [21], as well as
the wavelength of the pulse. Passive microwave (PM) products
are commonly used for estimating SIC because BT, measured

© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

by the sensor, effectively distinguishes ice from water [13],
[22], [23], [24]. Further, instruments operate independently of
incident solar radiation, and microwave radiation is capable of
penetrating clouds at lower microwave frequencies, such as
within the 6.9–18.7 GHz range [25]. A subset of the ERA5
climate variables can influence ice formation and break-up,
including wind speed and temperature [26].
Ice charts, which are used as labels, enable the development
of multitask, supervised models that are trained to predict SIC,
SOD, and FLOE. Accurate estimates of SIC can be used to
estimate sea ice extent, the total area covered by ≥15% concentration sea ice, which is a key climate change indicator for
the Arctic region [27]. Further, high resolution maps of SIC
are effective at illustrating the marginal ice zone (MIZ): the
transitionary region between full ice-cover and open water [28].
Long-term measurements of ice age and thickness, characterized
by SOD, are valuable for maritime strategic planning [29],
as well as climate monitoring and modeling [7]. Finally, sea
ice break-up, captured by floe size, impacts the exchange of
momentum between ocean and atmosphere [30]. Knowledge of
floe size is particularly important in the MIZ, where small floes
accelerate the lateral melt rate [31].
A. Limitations in Remote Sensing Data
While AI4Arctic allows researchers to more easily develop
models that combine the strengths of SAR and PM sensors,
both data types present limitations that impact the accuracy of
model predictions. The interpretability of these remotely sensed
measurements can be impacted by sensor limitations, surface
textures, and atmospheric effects, discussed below. These factors
present challenges for machine learning models, which may
struggle to correctly classify ice conditions without additional
context (e.g., regional or historical context known by ice analysts
but omitted from the input data). The term ambiguity, used
throughout this work, refers to measurements that may limit
a model’s ability to recognize patterns. This includes conditions
where a measurement could represent one of two conditions
(e.g., wind-roughened water and ice exhibiting similar backscatter signatures [15]), or where moisture (e.g., in the atmosphere
for PM [32], or in the snow layer for SAR [33]) could obscure
surface conditions.
In SAR imagery, backscatter signatures from surface textures
such as wind-roughened water and smooth ice can be misinterpreted as ice or still water, respectively [15]. These signatures
introduce ambiguity because they can represent multiple conditions, with additional information being required for a model to
correctly distinguish ice from water. In addition, the dielectric
properties of snow on the ice surface can influence backscatter
mechanisms, where for first year ice (FYI), brine-wetted snow
pack causes scattering at the snow-ice interface [33]. Further,
backscatter signatures for ice and water vary by incidence angle [34]; this angle, which varies by dataset scene, impacts the
appearance of open water and different ice types. For example,
open water at near range in a ScanSAR image will have a strong
backscatter and a bright appearance in a SAR image, while
open water at far range will mostly reflect, leading to a dark

24767

appearance. Thus, incidence angle information is required to
correctly interpret these measurements.
PM sensors provide data at a coarse spatial resolution, on
the scale of kilometers. Consequently, they are ineffective near
coastal boundaries and narrow waterways, where the sensor
footprint introduces land contamination in measurements of
ocean pixels [35]. In addition, studies have found that SIC
estimates using PM data are biased for thin ice due to low BT
emissivity [36], [37]. Similarly to SAR, open water measurements can be impacted by atmospheric effects, such as windroughening [38]. Further, at certain frequencies, these sensors
are sensitive to atmospheric moisture [32]. Thus, readings from
individual channels may introduce ambiguity, where limitations
in sensor resolution and surface obstruction from atmospheric
effects impact the accuracy of surface measurements.
B. Study Contributions
AI4Arctic does not include imagery from the optical, near,
or mid-infrared -ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum. We
propose that models trained using an additional thermal–infrared
channel may improve the accuracy of sea ice parameter predictions, where SAR and PM data are challenging for machine
learning models to interpret. Specifically, there is a potential for
ice surface temperature (IST) measurements to resolve ambiguous backscatter signatures in SAR imagery, and to supplement
PM data when accurate surface measurements are obstructed by
atmospheric interference. Thermal infrared data may provide
insight into ice age and thickness [39], [40]. Further, current
products [e.g., from MODIS [41] and Visible Infrared Imager
Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) [42]] offer finer resolution data than
PM imagery, allowing for accurate measurements where features
in PM are unresolved (e.g., near land boundaries). Ultimately,
IST measurements, which indicate surface temperature, have
the potential to provide a strong control on water at high spatial
resolution, which compliments AI4Arctic.
This work extends the dataset introduced by de Loë et al. [43]–
the study which verified that VIIRS IST data could be used in
conjunction with the AI4Arctic dataset. We make the following,
additional contributions.
1) We co-locate and georeference 54 additional VIIRS scenes
for use with the AI4Arctic dataset. This work extends our
preliminary evaluation of IST data [43], providing 84 total
scenes and the basis for the largest evaluation of AI4Arctic
and VIIRS data.
2) We assess the inclusion of IST with AI4Arctic against
the winning Artifical Intelligence for Earth Observation (AI4EO) AutoICE Challenge submission by
Chen et al. [18], which acts as the baseline for sea ice
parameter estimation. This work is accomplished using
established evaluation metrics and predicted sea ice maps.
Further, we introduce an alternative metric for comparing
the accuracy of SIC predictions.
3) We evaluate multiple approaches for fusing VIIRS IST
data at the input- and feature-levels. Comparing to the
best performing fusion approach from de Loë et al. [42],
we assess three variants on the U-Net architecture, which

24768

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

fuse features learned from combinations of IST, SAR,
PM, and reanalysis data in two separate encoders. The
presented fusion methodologies allow us to address three
main hypothesises:
a) That learning the combined features of Sentinel-1 and
VIIRS input channels can leverage the improvements
seen from including PM data for ice–water distinction,
at a higher resolution than AMSR2, which suffers from
land contamination.
b) That learning the salient features of VIIRS data, independent of the other input channels, may show unique
improvements, where features are not consistent between Sentinel-1 and VIIRS, or where VIIRS data is
cloud-obscured.
c) That use of task-specific decoders may allow the network to leverage a common set of learned features to
achieve more accurate estimates of conditions that are
specific to one sea ice parameter.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first published
research to incorporate VIIRS IST data as inputs in dualencoder and multidecoder U-Net architectures, and the
first to estimate SIC, SOD, and FLOE using these architectures.
II. BACKGROUND
The proposed architectures are designed to perform multitask,
supervised semantic segmentation. Accordingly, this section introduces CNN-based approaches to automated sea ice mapping,
methods for multimodal data fusion, as well as the performance
baseline used to assess inclusion of IST data, and the best
performing architecture from the preliminary de Loë et al. [43]
study.
A. U-Net Architectures
CNNs are common approach to deep learning-based sea
ice parameter estimation. Contributions to the field include
Wang et al. [44] and Boulze et al. [14], who used SAR imagery
to derive estimates of SIC and SOD, respectively. In addition,
Malmgren–Hansen et al.’s [13] estimation of SIC stands as one
of the earliest works that fuses SAR and PM data in a deep
learning model. The more recent U-Net architecture, designed
for medical imaging, outperforms traditional CNNs on image
segmentation [45]. Consequently, this architecture has seen
increasing adoption when estimating sea ice parameters as a
class-based segmentation task.
U-Net architectures consist of a contracting encoder path and
expanding decoder path, which are bridged by skip connections.
This symmetric structure, from which the name U-Net is derived,
allows for the extraction of hierarchical features in the encoder,
while restoring the latent representation to its original spatial
dimensions in the decoder. Skip connections, which concatenate
local encoder feature maps with their corresponding decoder
blocks, preserve high-resolution features and spatial information. The output of the network is n segmentation maps (where
n > 1 for a multitask architecture) at the spatial resolution of
the input image(s), for the specified classes.

In the context of sea ice mapping, U-Net architectures have
been used to estimate sea ice cover from SAR, improving the
accuracy of estimates in the MIZ [15], [16]. More recently, the
AI4SeaIce article series [17], [46], [47], [48] established the basis for the use of U-Nets in the AI4EO AutoICE Challenge [29].
As a result of this competition, where models were trained and
evaluated on the AI4Arctic dataset, U-Net architectures such as
Chen et al. [18] emerged as a leading method for automating sea
ice mapping based on multimodal remote sensing data.
Further, variations of the U-Net’s encoding and decoding
paths have succeeded at improving the architecture for specific
tasks. For example, in sea ice mapping, multiple encoders have
been used to fuse multimodal satellite data. In their ViSual_IceD
architecture, Rogers et al. [19] separated SAR and multispectral imagery in parallel encoders for ice–water classification.
Comparing to a traditional, single-encoder U-Net, this method
of learning features from data at different spatial resolutions
improves model performance. In addition, in the field of medical
imaging, Mahbod et al. [49] introduced a dual-decoder U-Net for
nuclei instance segmentation. The decoders simultaneously predict foreground and distance maps, and these outputs are merged
to improve segmentation performance for nuclei classification.
B. Data Fusion for Sea Ice Mapping
In remote sensing, data fusion approaches enable models
to make predictions based on imagery from multiple different
sensors, overcoming the limitations of a single product. Fusion
methods can be classified as one of three approaches: input-level,
feature-level, and decision-level.
1) Input-Level Fusion: In input-level fusion, models learn
common features shared across input channels. This method is
beneficial because it enables the network to learn features that
may not be evident from a single input [50]. This study assesses
two architectures that use input-level fusion. We compare the
best performing model from de Loë et al. [43], referred to as
AutoICE-V, to dual-encoder and multidecoder U-Net variants.
We also maintain the same baseline as the de Loë et al. study:
the AutoICE U-Net architecture proposed by Chen et al. [18].
2) Feature-Level Fusion: Feature-level fusion combines features learned from separate inputs in different parts of the
network. This approach is beneficial for fusing inputs from
different data sources, allowing the model to identify salient
features. Malmgren-Hansen et al. [13] and Rogers et al. [19]
both employed feature-level fusion: each model accepts input
channels with different resolutions, which are combined to
make pixel-wise predictions. The success of these models in
fusing high resolution SAR imagery with coarser PM measurements [13], and multispectral imagery [19], demonstrates the
benefits of this approach for satellite products.
3) Decision-Level Fusion: Decision-level fusion combines
results from multiple classifiers, often with a weighting scheme,
to improve the final decision for a single task [50]. For example,
Wang et al. [51] used a Bayesian framework to combine ice–
water information from SAR data with the AMSR-E daily ice
concentration product, improving the detail and accuracy of SIC
estimates. This approach is also common in algorithm-based

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

satellite sensor fusions, which do not use machine learning.
For example, both Ludwig et al. [9] and Konig et al. [10] (see
Section I) merge SIC estimates obtained from multiple remote
sensing products.
III. DATA
This study combines the AI4Arctic dataset with VIIRS IST
data that meets established criteria. The following sections introduce the data used as input channels, in addition to the method
for creating the co-registered VIIRS-AI4Arctic dataset, and its
composition.

24769

AI4Arctic ice charts labels report total SIC, dominant SOD,
and dominant FLOE. Dominant classes are assigned if there
is a majority partial concentration, representing ≥65% of the
polygon; otherwise, SOD and FLOE pixels are masked. Ice
charts are co-registered with Sentinel-1 SAR imagery, and an
egg code’s information is applied to every pixel contained in
that polygon [29]. Each pixel within a polygon inherits its label,
although this may not reflect pixel-level SAR variation. Further,
analysts may overestimate low SIC, and report more variability
for mid-range concentrations, impacting the accuracy of these
labels [54].
B. VIIRS IST

A. AI4Arctic Data
AI4Arctic consists of geo-referenced SAR and PM imagery,
reanalysis data, and auxiliary information. Associated ice charts
from the Canadian and Greenland Ice Services are provided,
which are used by models during training and evaluation. The
full dataset consists of 533 scenes sampled from January 2018 to
December 2021, with acquisition frequency varying by region.
While 513 scenes were released during the AI4EO AutoICE
Challenge and 20 reserved for evaluation, this study uses a
separate test set with minimal cloud cover to better assess IST
data under diverse conditions.
This study uses the Ready-to-Train AI4Arctic dataset, which
provides normalized data [20]. SAR, auxiliary, and ice chart data
are provided at a pixel spacing of 80 m, down-sampled from
the original 40 m spacing. PM and reanalysis measurements
are gridded to a resolution of 2 km. Each scene also includes
geolocation and timestamp information.
1) Sentinel-1 SAR: Sentinel-1 HH and HV polarized, Extra
Wide Swath images are provided, which have been noise corrected using the NERSC algorithm [52]. This imagery reports
the backscatter coefficient, measured in dB. Incidence angle and
the distance to the nearest coast measurements are provided as
auxiliary information at the same pixel spacing.
2) AMSR2 PM: The Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer 2 (AMSR2) provides horizontally and vertically polarized BT measurements at 6.9, 7.3, 10.65, 18.7, 23.8, 36.5, and
89 GHz. Spatial resolution varies by channel; 6.9 GHz offers
the coarsest ground resolution (35 × 62 km), whereas 89 GHz
offers the finest resolution (3 × 5 km) [53].
3) ERA5 Reanalysis Data: Five numerical weather prediction (NWP) parameters are provided from the ERA5 reanalysis
dataset: 10 m wind speed (given as components), 2 m air temperature, total column water vapour, total column cloud liquid
water, and skin temperature [29].
4) Ice Charts: Ice charts report conditions using Egg
Codes [12], where polygonal regions are defined in terms of
the total SIC, partial concentrations, stages of development, and
floe sizes. In this context, SIC is the sum of partial concentrations, reported in tenths, and associated with the n thickest ice
conditions in the polygon (typically n = 3). SOD relates to the
age and thickness of ice, while floe size characterizes the degree
of break-up. Similar to SIC, n measurements are reported, each
associated with a partial concentration [12].

The VIIRS provides IST data in the form of 6-min, L2 Swath
scenes with a pixel spacing of 750 m. Calculating IST follows
a similar approach to MODIS: VIIRS calibrated radiance data
from bands M15 and M16 are converted into BT measurements [55], and IST is calculated using a split-window method.
IST values are reported in Kelvin, and the product contains flags
for features such as land, ocean, and cloud. Targeted uncertainty
for this product is ± 1K over the range of 213–275 K [56].
C. VIIRS Scene Selection
Scene selection criteria remain consistent with those used in
de Loë et al. [43]. However, the threshold for the percentage
of cloud contaminated pixels was increased from 50% to 60%
in order to increase the size of the dataset. These criteria are
summarized in Table I. In addition to those thresholds, VIIRS
scenes are graded as “good,” “mid,” or “poor” based on percentages of cloud contaminated pixels and scene overlap with
the Sentinel-1 latitude-longitude grids. These grades are used
to select scenes for each of the train-validation and test sets,
discussed in Section III-D.
1) Acquisition Window: Same day acquisition matches the
retrieval criteria for the AI4Arctic dataset [20]. The maximum
acquisition window is set relative to similar studies; specifically,
Malmgren-Hansen et al.’s [13] use of 7 h preceding and 2 h
following the Sentinel-1 imagery, and Rogers et al.’s [19] use of
8 h in regions with low drift velocities. Comparing the AMSR2
sensor footprint and the finer spatial resolution of MODIS MSI
product (100 m), a threshold of 8 h is sufficient for VIIRS.
Further, of the scenes used in the dataset, only 6% had an
acquisition window greater than 7 h (see Table I).
2) Scene Composition: A minimum area of overlap between
the Sentinel-1 and VIIRS scenes ensures that sufficient VIIRS
IST data is present in the image, as regions of fill are masked
and do not contribute to model predictions. A general temperature threshold is used to identify the percentage of IST pixels
registering as sea ice, which freezes at 271.4 K [56]. Because
thermal–infrared data may provide insights into ice age and
thickness [39], [40], an additional threshold is used to confirm
the presence of older ice, ensuring that the dataset evaluates use
of IST data under varied ice conditions.
3) Co-Registration Method: Viable VIIRS scenes are coregistered, per pixel, with the Sentinel-1 images. The latitude–
longitude grids provided by AI4Arctic are up-sampled, and

24770

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF SCENE SELECTION CRITERIA, GRADING

a polygonal region of intersection between the VIIRS and
Sentinel-1 images is found. All VIIRS pixels outside of this region are discarded, and a nearest neighbor approach is used to coregister the scenes. This approach, discussed in de Loë et al. [43],
effectively handles differences between IST data (temperatures
in Kelvin), flags (integers outside of the valid temperature range),
and coordinates that exceed the bounds of the Sentinel-1 scene
(set to NaN). Prior to use in a model, flag data is masked and
the remaining IST data are normalized using the mean and
standard deviation. IST measurements in cloud-contaminated
pixels, which report inaccurate measurements, and are masked
by the product [56].
D. VIIRS-AI4Arctic Dataset Composition
This study separates the 84-scene VIIRS-AI4Arctic dataset
into a 72-scene train-validation set, and 12-scene test set, which
is held out for evaluation. Due to the limited size of the dataset,
the train-validation set is also used for training, validation, and
testing during hyperparameter tuning. The train-validation set is
further subdivided into six, 12-scene folds; during hyperparameter tuning, folds 1–5 were used for training and validation, while
fold 6 was used for testing. Several considerations, summarized
below, inform the selection of these datasets.
1) Percentage of Cloud Cover: Due to emphasis on assessing
predictions with IST data, scenes assigned “good” and “mid”
quality grades were prioritized for fold 6 and the test dataset. Mid
quality scenes were included in order to achieve a representative
sample of years, months, regions, and ice conditions. Scenes
belonging to all three quality grades were assigned to the trainvalidation set; “poor” scenes with a higher percentage of cloud
cover are included, because they are still useful for training.
2) Spatial-Temporal Distribution: The formation of sea ice–
referred to as freeze-up–begins in early fall; conversely, ice
break-up begins in the spring, with melt accelerating throughout
the summer [1], [6]. The VIIRS-AI4Arctic dataset encompasses
November through May, capturing freeze-up and break-up, but
excluding late melt conditions. June through October were omitted from the dataset, based on the limited availability of noncloudy scenes. The train-validation and test sets were selected
to adequately sample across space and time; this decision was
prompted by findings from Chen et al. [18] that spatial-temporal
encodings increase the accuracy of SOD predictions when the

Fig. 1. Study region of the 84 scene dataset. The total scene distribution is
22% (Region 1: Hudson Bay & lower Baffin Bay), 49% (Region 2: upper Baffin
Bay & Canadian Archipelago), and 29% (Region 3: Greenland Sea).

sampling is sufficient. The full 84-scene dataset is illustrated in
Fig. 1. The 12-scene test set, comprising a subset of scenes,
features a comparable distribution of years and regions, and
evenly samples acquisition months.
3) Pixel Class Distribution: Table II summarizes the distribution of pixels, by ice chart class, for each of the sea ice
parameters. The test set was selected such that there would not be
any large class imbalances compared to the full train-validation
dataset. This class distribution covers scenes with a variety of
ice conditions (full ice cover, MIZs, landfast ice, etc.).
4) Percentage Unmasked Ice Chart Data: AI4Arctic ice
chart labels mask certain classes (e.g., pancake ice), polygons
with no dominant ice type, and land. As a result, the amount of
masked data in a scene is inconsistent; Table III demonstrates
that a fold may contain as much as 58.98% unmasked data,
or as little as 15.82%, and that SOD and FLOE charts are
disproportionally affected. Resultantly, the test data was selected
such that SOD and FLOE would contain a comparable fraction
of masked pixels to SIC.

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

24771

TABLE II
SUMMARY OF CLASS DISTRIBUTION BY SEA ICE PARAMETER FOR EACH OF THE TRAIN-VALIDATION AND TEST SETS

TABLE III
PERCENTAGE OF UNMASKED PIXELS, REPORTED FOR SIC, SOD, AND FLOE

TABLE IV
SUMMARY OF MODELS, BY NAME AND DESCRIPTION

IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Data Pre- and Postprocessing
This study assesses the impacts of IST data by comparing
predictions using the same 16 AI4Arctic channels selected by
Chen et al. [18]. Sentinel-1 HH and HV images are used in
conjunction with incidence angle and distance to land. Incidence angle information is provided due to its impact on radar
backscatter [34], while distance-to-land maps are useful because
the scene’s associated PM measurements become inaccurate
near land [15], [29]. Of the seven frequencies and two polarizations, four AMSR2 BT channels (18.7 and 36.5 GHz, H and
V) are used. These channels balance sensitivity to sea ice and
insensitivity to atmospheric effects. Lower-frequency channels
have coarser spatial resolutions [16], while higher ones (e.g.,
89 GHz) are more sensitive to atmospheric phenomena (e.g.,
water vapor) [57].
These channels are supported by five of the ERA5 reanalysis
parameters, excluding skin temperature. In addition, gridded
latitude and longitude data, as well as the scene’s acquisition
month, are provided as auxiliary inputs and used for spatialtemporal encodings. Finally, three sets of ice charts, corresponding to total SIC, dominant SOD, and dominant FLOE are
provided, per scene; these channels are used as reference labels
instead of network inputs.
Prior to entering the network, the 80-m spaced Sentinel-1
channels, co-registered IST measurements, and ice charts are
downsampled by a factor of 10, reducing these scenes to approximately 500 × 500 pixels. This downsampling brings the
Sentinel-1 resolution close to the original resolution of the VIIRS thermal channel. This downscaling results in a larger receptive field, improving the model’s ability to predict the polygonbased ice chart labels, which are inconsistent with pixel-level
SAR measurements. Concurrently, the gridded AMSR2, ERA5,
and auxiliary channels are upsampled to match this new pixel
spacing. Uniform height and width dimensions are enforced
across channels by extracting randomly cropped, 256 × 256

TABLE V
MODEL SPECIFICATIONS, SUMMARIZED BY ARCHITECTURE

patches from scenes in the training set. Data augmentation
techniques, summarized in Table V, are employed to increase
the training dataset’s size. During evaluation, validation and
test scenes are still downsampled. However, entire scenes are
accepted as inputs to the trained model, instead of patches. As a
result of this preprocessing, sea ice maps are predicted at the
downscaled spatial resolution. At the output of the network,
predictions are interpolated such that maps are evaluated at the
original 80 m pixel spacing. Ultimately, this approach, seen in
Fig. 2, follows previous work using the full AI4Arctic dataset
and labels, which achieved enhanced accuracy and improved the
capture of contextual information [18].

24772

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

Fig. 2. Summary of the data processing pipeline, and three base architectures used by the study. Input and output feature map dimensions for each architecture
are labelled. ∗Downscaling of VIIRS data applies to AutoICE-V, both DEU-Net architectures, and TDU-Net-V. ∗∗ Encoder 2 applies to DEU-Net-V, -SV, and
TDU-Net-V. ∗∗∗IST data is omitted from AutoICE. ∗∗∗∗SAR input channels are grouped with VIIRS in DEU-Net-SV, and the remaining AI4Arctic channels in
DEU-Net-V.

B. Summary of U-Net Architectures
Three variants on the U-Net architecture were developed,
which assess methods of fusing IST data at the feature-level.
These architectures are compared to the baseline AutoICE architecture [18], and the AutoICE-V [43] method for fusing IST data
at the input-level. Two dual-encoder U-Nets are trialled, which
1) group inputs by finer (SAR and IST) and coarser (PM, ERA5,
aux) spatial resolution, and 2) learn IST features independently
from the AI4Arctic channels. Following tuning, these models
were compared to AutoICE-V. Finally, a tri-decoder U-Net,
which employs separate decoders for SIC, SOD, and FLOE,
was trained based on the encoding path from the best performing
architecture. Models are summarized, by name, in Table IV.
These architectures build on the base AutoICE structure [18],
which consists of four sets of encoder and decoder blocks,
connected by a bridge layer. A single block is comprised of two
sets of convolutional layers, followed by batch normalization
and the ReLU activation function. During tuning, changes to
this structure yielded no performance improvements (see Section IV-C). Thus, all architectures consist of these four-block
sets, varying the number of encoder and decoder paths. Feature
map dimensions associated with each block are specified in
Fig. 2. For each of SOD and FLOE, outputs from the final
decoder block are fed into a 1 × 1 convolution layer followed

by the softmax activation function; the model predicts the pixel
as belonging to one of seven (SOD) or eight (FLOE) discrete
classes. Concurrently, the decoder output for SIC is fed into a
regression layer. Prior to evaluation, SIC predictions are rounded
to the nearest tenth, matching the ice chart labels. Based on
the task’s treatment as a regression or classification problem,
mean squared error (MSE) and cross entropy (CE) loss are used,
respectively. A cumulative, weighted loss function, comprised
of the task-specific losses, informs model training. A summary
of model specification is provided in Table V, while Fig. 2
summarizes the model architectures.
Both the AutoICE and AutoICE-V architectures are retrained
on this study’s 84-scene dataset to provide 1) a fair comparison
to the baseline, and 2) an assessment of input- and feature-level
fusion approaches, evaluated on a larger dataset, and comprising
a wider variety of ice conditions. Two feature-level fusion approaches are compared to identify the key differences in learning
combined features from IST and SAR, versus features learned
solely from IST data. Previous works (see Section II-B) fuse
data from two instruments; thus, these models learn features
from each data type in separate encoder branches. Following
this approach, two-, three-, and four-encoder U-Nets could be
evaluated. Ultimately, this study seeks to test existing findings

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

with DEU-Net-SV, grouping the 80-m SAR and co-registered
IST data in one encoder, and the gridded AMSR2, ERA5,
and auxiliary data in another. In addition, due to the masking
of cloud-contaminated pixels in IST data, we anticipate an
imbalance in features learned from the Sentinel-1 data. Thus,
DEU-Net-V intends to assess if salient features learned from
IST can reduce misclassification from SAR and PM data. Last,
TDU-Net-V investigates the use of multiple decoders, which
has achieved success in other domains [49], but is yet untested
for multitask sea ice mapping. This study assesses 1) how use
of multiple decoders could improve segmentation of SIC, SOD,
and FLOE, and 2) if improvements in individual parameters
reduce overall accuracy because ice chart labels are assigned
over shared polygonal regions.
C. Experimental Setup
All experiments are conducted using an NVIDIA A100SXM4-40 GB GPU, 60 GB of memory, and Pytorch version
2.0.1 with CUDA 11.8. These resources are accessed using the
Narval cluster, supported by the Digital Research Alliance of
Canada. Models are trained for 300 epochs, with each epoch
consisting of 500 iterations. This training approach is consistent
with Chen et al. [18], in order to compare their baseline model
to predictions made using IST data.
Models are evaluated using the average result of holdout kfold cross validation, and the datasets described in Section III-D.
Each run, one train-validation fold is assigned to validation,
while the remaining scenes are used for model training. A
grid-search approach was used to evaluate key hyperparameters (learning rate, optimizer, batch size, number of convolutional filters, etc.). Different network depths were assessed, but
no meaningful improvements from the AutoICE configuration
were found. Optimized model specifications are summarized in
Table V.
During evaluation, all of folds 1–6 are used as the trainvalidation set. The test set is fixed in order to evaluate model
performance when trained on different class distributions. This
process is repeated six times for each architecture, which allows
each fold to be assigned to the validation set. Test and validation scores are then averaged across the six folds, which are
consistent across the models. While models are evaluated on
consistent validation and test scenes, training patch selection is
randomized.

where N denotes the number of pixels, yit denotes the true value
of the ith pixel according to the ice chart, ŷ t denotes the mean
value over all true pixels containing sea ice, and yip denotes the
pixel’s predicted SIC class [29]. An R2 score of one (100% )
corresponds to a perfect fit of the data, whereas a score of zero
reflects no linear relationship between the target and predicted
values.
The F1 score, which is similarly expressed as a percentage, is
defined as follows:
F 1 = (TP)/(TP + 1/2(FP + FN))

i=1

i=1

(2)

where TP denotes the number of true positive pixels, FP denotes
the number of false positive pixels, and FN denotes the number
of false negative pixels [29]. Here, a high F1 score (around one or
100% ) reflects an accurate prediction of the ice chart labels (TP),
and minimal misclassification (FP and FN). For a multiclass
classification problem, F1 scores are calculated on a per-class
basis and averaged across the classes.
Finally, a weighted sum of these metrics, C, is used to generate
the combined score [29]
2
+ (2/5) ∗ F 1SOD + (1/5) ∗ F 1FLOE . (3)
C = (2/5) ∗ RSIC

In addition, we present a SIC accuracy metric, which is
used to provide a visual assessment of model performance
within the three parent categories of ice formation: open water (0 ≤ SIC < 20% ), marginal ice (20 ≤ SIC ≤ 80% ),
and consolidated ice (SIC > 80% ). Previous works, (e.g.,
Cheng et al. [54]) evaluate the accuracy of SIC labels within
±10% of the true concentration, in order to alleviate errors
by ice analysts and account for variability in ice concentration
within a polygon. We apply a broader threshold to the marginal
ice classes, assessing a model’s ability to accurately predict
within this category, which is underrepresented in the dataset
(see Table II). SICs between 15 and 80% are commonly accepted
as thresholds for the MIZ [28], [30], [58]. Because the ice
chart labels report concentrations in tenths, 20% is used as the
minimum threshold for marginal ice. Concentrations below this
threshold are assigned to the open water category. Similarly,
we assign concentrations exceeding the marginal ice threshold
to the category of consolidated ice. While this terminology is
traditionally applied to 100% concentration ice [12], 90% SIC
is assigned to this category because it exceeds the marginal ice
threshold, and is within ±10% of the true concentration. This
metric, described in (4), provides a scene-level comparison of
SIC predictions across these three categories

D. Evaluation Metrics
For comparison to other studies leveraging the AI4Arctic
dataset, all metrics used during the AI4EO AutoICE challenge
are reported. These include: the R2 coefficient (see (1)) for SIC,
the F1 score (2) for SOD and FLOE, and a combined score (see
(3)), which weights the importance of each parameter for ice
analysts.
The coefficient of determination, referred to as R2 , is given as
N
N

 
 
2 
p 2
2
t
yi − yi
/
yit − ŷ t
R =1−
(1)

24773

Accuracy = 1/N ∗

N


1(yi = yˆi )

(4)

i

where a scene’s accuracy is calculated by dividing the scene’s
correct pixels [the sum of (yi = yˆi ) for each pixel i] by its total
pixels, N . Prior to this calculation, pixels are assigned to one of
the three ice formation classes based on the predicted SIC. These
results are compared to the SIC ice chart, after the thresholds are
applied. An example of the applied thresholds is given in Fig. 3.
Several reasons motivate this metric’s use: 1) this metric is
meant to supplement R2 , providing easier visual analysis; 2)

24774

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

TABLE VI
VALIDATION AND TEST METRICS AVERAGED OVER THE SIX CROSS-VALIDATION FOLDS, REPORTED AS THE AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION

Fig. 3. Example of the SIC thresholds applied to 2019-01-29 on the west coast
of Greenland. Comparison of SIC (left) and the three ice formation categories
(right).

existing models do not effectively segment marginal ice polygons. This approach allows us to visually assess the general
shape of the MIZ, acknowledging that use of total concentration
and pixel-level differences between the satellite imagery and
charts may cause these discrepancies; 3) this metric penalizes
predictions outside of these three classes–something that R2
does not provide, because it measures relative distance between
predicted and target classes.
V. RESULTS
A. Relative Model Performance
Table VI reports the average and standard deviation of each
metric for the validation and test sets. Here, the validation set
comprises all scenes in folds 1–6, while the test set remains constant. Notably, higher standard deviation is reported across the
validation set for all models, with the largest standard deviation
across scores being reported for SOD and floe size. Referring
to Table III, these parameters have the folds containing the
least data, and the largest variation in percentage of unmasked
data (15.82–46.87% for SOD and 22.77–42.08% for FLOE,
relative to 40.74–58.98% for SIC). Further, the percentage of
masked data across parameters differs at the scene level (e.g.,
Figs. 4–7). This discrepancy results from AI4Arctic’s definition

of a dominant ice type, where there must be a dominant partial
concentration for SOD and FLOE labels to be assigned [20].
Thus, classification errors in folds containing minimal unmasked
data result in low, outlying scores, which skew the reported
average and standard deviation.
In comparison, test set scores report more consistent standard deviations across parameters, in line with comparable
data representation of 57.75% unmasked SIC pixels, 46.87%
unmasked SOD pixels, and 41.12% unmasked FLOE pixels.
Some variability in model predictions for both validation and
test can be attributed to different class distributions across train
sets, in addition to training on random scene patches.
Comparing results, by metric, for the test set, the greatest
overall performance improvement is found using the DEU-NetV architecture, which improves predictive accuracy by 2.44%
(SIC), 5.01% (SIC accuracy), 2.18% (SOD), 4.21% (FLOE),
and 2.23% (combined score). The greatest improvement is seen
in SIC accuracy, which does not impact the combined score.
The following sections compare a subset of test set examples,
illustrating these improvements.
B. Comparison of Predicted Sea Ice Maps
Figs. 4–7 provide a visual comparison of predicted sea ice
maps for the five architectures, across varied regions and seasons. Fig. 4 compares all five architectures across the three sea
ice parameters. Fig. 6 directly assesses the impacts of IST data
on model predictions by comparing AutoICE and AutoICE-V,
then comparing to DEU-Net-V as the best performing model.
Finally, Fig. 7 highlights a case where use of task-specific decoders improves model predictions. These predictions leverage
coincident remote sensing data retrieved on the scene date.
The predicted sea ice maps, generated at inference-time, are
compared to AI4Arctic ice charts. Example input channels for
each scene are provided to aid visual analysis.
1) Performance Across Models: Fig. 4 illustrates mid-season
freeze-up conditions off the coast of Labrador, Canada. The
chart depicts mixed polygons of marginal and consolidated ice,

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

Fig. 4.

24775

Summary of model predictions for all architectures, compared for 2020-01-24 off the coast of Labrador.

in addition to an open water region. Referring to the input
channels (see Fig. 5), the SAR imagery records open water with
comparable-to-higher backscatter measurements than the ice,
which can result from low incidence angle or wind roughening. The associated BT measurements exhibit noise over water,
likely due to atmospheric moisture or similar wind roughening.
These ambiguous features result in classification errors across
all models–predominantly in the prediction of open water.
While IST data is largely masked in the open water region, the
unmasked measurements exceeding 271 K do positively impact
predictions, as seen in the more accurate DEU-Net-V SIC map.
Compared to AutoICE-V and DEU-Net-SV, in regions where

IST data is largely masked, features learned in combination
with ambiguous backscatter signatures yield lower accuracy.
Additionally, relative to the AutoICE baseline, IST data is seen
to improve predictions for floe size, where big floe is underestimated.
DEU-Net-SV and TDU-Net-V both provide better approximations of the region of 70 and 80% concentration, although
these features are largely predicted as 90% consolidated ice. In
addition, these improvements are in conjunction with greater
overestimation of marginal ice, similarly to the predictions
by both AutoICE architectures. For DEU-Net-SV, this region is differentiable from consolidated ice in both SAR and

24776

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

Fig. 5. HH SAR (left), 36.5 GHZ H BT (middle), and IST (right) input
channels for 2020-01-24. Note: certain AI4Arctic BT scenes are a mosaic of
multiple AMSR2 swaths, with pixels selected based on minimizing acquisition
time with Sentinel-1 [20].

PM measurements. Thus, this fusion approach is capable of
capturing features that are less evident in the IST data. However,
overestimation of ice concentration in the open water region
demonstrates the benefits of learning IST features independently
from SAR and PM measurements. These findings are supported
by the input-level fusion approaches, which report the highest
concentrations in the open water region.
Comparing the single and task-specific decoders, DEU-NetSV’s misclassification of open water for SOD and FLOE relates
to the misclassification of open water as 30% SIC. Similarly,
DEU-Net-V’s more accurate classification of 0% concentration
improves SOD and FLOE predictions. Across the AutoICE
and DEU-Net architectures, misclassification of open water is
largely consistent across the three sea ice parameters. Conversely, TDU-Net-V inconsistently predicts open water, and reports potentially incompatible predictions of low concentration
ice, young ice, and big floe in the same region.
Of the five models, DEU-Net-V achieves the best SOD prediction, although no model accurately segments the thin FYI
feature. In addition, while DEU-Net-V misclassifies the central
region of big floe, predictions from other folds, which are trained
on different class distributions, do not predict this error. This
variability is an example of sensitivity to the pixel class distribution, which contributes to the standard deviations reported in
Table VI.
2) Impacts of Input-Level Fusion: Fig. 6 depicts early season
melt off the west coast of Greenland. This chart is characterized
by a region of full ice cover, in addition to an inland region
surrounding Disko Island that features mixed marginal and
consolidated ice conditions, and open water.
Comparing predicted SIC maps for input-level fusion,
AutoICE-V more accurately models the consolidated ice region
south of Disko Island, in addition to reducing misclassification
of marginal ice north of Disko Island. For SOD, AutoICE-V
reduces misclassification of thin FYI in the same region. Neither
model correctly predicts the inland regions as thin FYI; however,
use of IST data produces a more accurate prediction of the thick
FYI region. Finally, comparing floe size, the models achieve
comparable accuracy on open water and vast flow. AutoICE
accurately predicts the region south of Disko Island as big
floe whereas AutoICE-V more accurately predicts the same ice
condition in the region between Disko Island and the peninsula.
Referring to the input channels (see Fig. 6), the region of
90% concentration south of Disko Island registers a backscatter
signature that is challenging for models to correctly interpret.

Here, regions of smooth ice appear similarly to the scene’s
smaller regions of open water, and the entire feature registers
as darker than the large regions of open water and consolidated
ice. BT measurements distinguish this region from open water
and consolidated ice; however, IST data in combination with
BT further reduces ambiguity. Notably, both models appear to
correlate SIC and FLOE predictions. For AutoICE-V, misclassification as vast floe is consistent with the classification of 90%
SIC. Similarly for AutoICE, correct classification of big floe
is more consistent with the model’s misclassification of 90%
SIC as 70% –80% . Finally, comparing to the SAR imagery, the
resolutions of the VIIRS and AMSR2 products are too coarse to
improve predictions of ice conditions in the tributaries. Overall,
fusion of IST at the input-level appears to improve predictions
most significantly over regions with homogeneous conditions
(e.g., in the case of SOD).
Further, comparing DEU-Net-V to AutoICE-V, feature-level
fusion of IST data is found to more accurately predict the region
of consolidated ice south of Disko Island, in addition to the
two, small open water regions north and south of the island.
In addition, this architecture reduces misclassification of thin
FYI above Disko Island, and vast floe in the southern region
of consolidated ice. However, AutoICE-V more correctly predicts big floe between Disko Island and the peninsula, whereas
DEU-Net-V classifies the region as vast floe, in line with its
overestimation of SIC. Both models report similar predictions
to the AutoICE baseline in the tributaries; this is expected, as
the spatial resolution of the IST data does not accurately capture
this region.
3) Impacts of Task-Specific Decoders: Fig. 7 illustrates early
melt conditions on the west coast of Greenland. The scene is
characterized by a large region of consolidated ice, followed by
a MIZ and a region of open water, which is expanding with melt
along the ice edge. Example input channels, included in Fig. 7,
illustrate noise over the open water region in the AMSR2 data, as
well as distinct SAR backscatter signatures, which differentiate
thin and thick FYI from old ice. While much of the open water
IST data is masked, there is a strong delineation between the
100% and 80% concentrations at the boundary of the MIZ.
Comparing TDU-Net-V to the DEU-Net-V architecture, this
model is more susceptible to noise in the BT measurements,
resulting in incorrect predictions of 10% SIC. However, TDUNet-V improves predictions of thin and thick FYI (SOD), as
well as small floes (FLOE). Here, task specific decoders are
found to improve predictions where input channel features (e.g.,
the SAR backscatter signature) coincide with an individual
sea ice parameter. Specifically, a homogeneous region for one
parameter is composed of multiple polygons, which may report
mixed conditions for another (e.g., comparing SIC and SOD).
In these cases, the separate decoders are able to reconstruct
different representations based on common features extracted
by the shared encoders. However, this architecture is unable to
improve the segmentation of SIC polygons in the MIZ–a task
all models struggle with in this cross validation fold. Further,
because much of this zone is masked for SOD and FLOE, we
cannot comment on if this trend persists when labels are available
for all three parameters.

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

24777

Fig. 6. Summary of AutoICE, AutoICE-V, and DEU-Net-V model predictions for 2021-04-19 on the west coast of Greenland. The SIC, SIC Acc, SOD, and
FLOE columns display model predictions. Associated HH SAR (top), 36.5 GHZ H BT (middle), and IST (bottom) input channels are provided on the right for
comparison with the ice chart labels.

Fig. 7. Summary of DEU-Net-V and TDU-Net-V model predictions for 2021-03-01 off the west coast of Greenland. The SIC, SIC Acc, SOD, and FLOE columns
display model predictions. Associated HH SAR (top), 36.5 GHZ H BT (middle), and IST (bottom) input channels are provided on the right for comparison with
the ice chart labels.

VI. DISCUSSION
A. Impacts of Fusion Approaches
Overall, learning the salient features of IST data using
the DEU-Net-V architecture best reduces classification errors
resulting from ambiguous SAR and PM measurements. Across
all models, IST data used in combination with BT measurements
reduces the impacts of ambiguous SAR textures. Further, IST

measurements consistently improve the classification of open
water where incidence angle impacts backscatter measurements,
atmospheric moisture introduces noise in BT readings, and
where wind roughening causes ambiguity in ice–water classification for both sensors.
Comparing the dual-encoder architectures, complimentary
features learned between SAR and IST data (DEU-Net-SV)
result in higher rates of misclassification when IST data is

24778

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

Fig. 8. Accuracy of AutoICE and DEU-Net-V predicting the correct class of SIC, SOD, and floe size, compared to the representation of each class in the test
dataset.

masked and SAR measurements are challenging to interpret.
Thus, learning complimentary SAR and PM features, where
BT effectively distinguishes between ice and water, improves
predictions. Conversely, salient features learned from IST data
are able to reduce SAR and PM ambiguities where data is
present. Overall, masked data and spatial resolution–impacting
small floes and tributaries–constrain the potential for IST to
improve accuracy. A single, shared decoder improves contextual awareness, improving the classification of shared classes;
specifically, open water. This trend is consistent across single,
and dual-encoder architectures, including the AutoICE baseline.
Conversely, TDU-Net-V is found to predict incompatible conditions across the three parameters (e.g., young ice and big floes in
the same region, as in Fig. 4). However, task-specific decoders,
used in TDU-Net-V, are effective at reconstructing features that
are specific to a single sea ice parameter. These findings result
in an architecture that outperforms the AutoICE baseline, but is
ultimately less competitive than the other models incorporating
IST data.
Finally, the AutoICE-V architecture, presented in de
Loë et al. [43], continues to achieve competitive performance
on the expanded VIIRS-AI4Arctic dataset. Use of IST data
in this fusion approach improves predictions relative to the
AutoICE baseline, reducing overestimation of open water as low
concentration ice (see Fig. 4), and improving underestimation
of consolidated ice (see Fig. 6). However, feature-level fusion of
IST data is found to better mitigate classification errors overall.

B. DEU-Net-V Performance
In addition, class-wise accuracy scores are compared between the best performing model, DEU-Net-V, and the AutoICE
baseline. In Fig. 8, accuracy scores are reported for the three
sea ice parameters over the test set’s six cross-validation runs.
These scores are also compared to the pixel class distribution in the test set, excluding masked data (e.g., land pixels).
Across all parameters, there is a correlation between classes with

higher representation–consistent across datasets (see Table II)–
achieving higher accuracy scores. Further, model predictions,
which exhibit minor variability across cross-validation folds,
are most consistent in classifying consolidated ice, which is the
most represented class.
1) SIC: For SIC, we choose to compare the three ice formation categories in place of the 11 discrete concentrations.
This choice results from low representation of the 10% –80%
classes, accounting for between 0.19% –4.2% of unmasked test
set pixels. Consequently, class-wise accuracy scores for these
concentrations are disproportionately affected by classification
errors, similar to cross-validation folds with significant masked
data.
Overall, use of IST data and the DEU-Net-V architecture
improves classification of open water and marginal ice, while
both models predict consolidated ice with comparable accuracy.
Referring to Fig. 8, improvements in predicting the open water
and consolidated ice classes coincide with reduced misclassifications of marginal ice. These results demonstrate significant
improvements in the classification of open-water regions where
SAR and PM data is challenging to interpret, or obstructed by
atmospheric interference.
Further, the models overwhelmingly misclassify marginal
ice as consolidated ice; 42% of AutoICE misclassifications
are attributed to consolidated ice, compared to 38% for DEUNet-V. These errors predominantly occur with 70% and 80%
concentration labels, supporting the conclusion that the overrepresentation of consolidated ice skews predictions toward
these classes.1 Ultimately, we do not anticipate significant improvements in segmenting MIZ polygons due to pixel-level
differences in total concentration, and uncertainty in ice chart
labels for marginal concentrations.
2) SOD: The dual-encoder architecture consistently outperforms class-wise accuracy scores for SOD. Referring to Fig. 8,
1 For AutoICE, 79% of 70% SIC pixels are misclassified as consolidated ice,
and 64% for 80% SIC. These statistics are 76% and 52%, respectively, for
DEU-Net-V.

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

accuracy is improved for all classes, excluding identical scores
for thin and thick FYI, where the IST product retrieves similar
measurements. This lack of improvement may also result from
lower dataset representation, and learned ice type relationships
between SOD, SIC, and FLOE. Alternatively, it may reflect
real-world conditions if both ice types are represented in a region
but only the majority ice type (e.g., thin FYI) is assigned as the
polygon label.
The model continues to outperform AutoICE on the open
water class, supporting findings that IST measurements improve
classification where SAR and PM channels yield ambiguous
or inaccurate surface measurements. In addition, cases such as
Fig. 4 demonstrate improvements in the prediction of land-fast
ice, where PM measurements are inaccurate. While both models
are poor predictors of new ice, which is the least represented
class, DEU-Net-V still increases correct classification of this
ice type.
3) Floe Size: DEU-Net-V improves class-wise accuracy
scores for open water, as well as medium, big, and vast floes
(see Fig. 8), resulting in the performance improvements seen
in Table VI. The AutoICE baseline does outperform this architecture for small and medium floes; this finding is attributed to
the spatial resolution of the VIIRS product. Specifically, small
floes are 20–100 m across, while medium floes range from 100
to 500 m–both of which require a finer resolution than the IST
product [12]. While alternative fusion architectures (e.g., DEUNet-SV) may improve scores for these classes, this architecture
still achieves the highest accuracy across all parameters. In
addition, because small floes are largely misclassified as medium
floes (72% for AutoICE versus 75% for DEU-Net-V), this issue
may be partially attributed to low dataset representation and
learned relationships between parameters, similar to thin FYI.
C. Applications of SIC Accuracy
Comparison of SIC predictions using the categories of open
water, marginal ice, and consolidated ice (see Section IV-D),
provides both an effective visual tool for comparing model
predictions, and captures misclassifications outside of the label’s
category of ice formation. As demonstrated in Fig. 6 with
consolidated ice, use of these thresholds improves the ability to
identify and interpret classification errors. This method can be
easily applied to other studies, because the thresholds are applied
to the predicted concentrations following model evaluation.
In addition, we found that not penalizing predictions within
the marginal ice category is useful for evaluating models when
datasets have limited representation of these classes. Ultimately, misclassifications within underrepresented categories
minimally impact scores. Comparing to existing approaches,
we argue that these broad categories are of greater interest to
analysts, because ±10% does not result in a decrease in accuracy
if the misclassification is an adjacent class, but different category
of ice formation.
Notably, the metric reports lower test accuracy (see
Table VI) than R2 , highlighting misclassifications of open water
as marginal ice, and marginal ice as consolidated ice. These
misclassifications minimally impact R2 , because classifications

24779

is adjacent and nearby classes results in lower penalties. Conversely, the validation set reports a higher accuracy; from analysis of the train-validation set, this is attributed to evaluation
over a larger dataset, featuring a smaller percentage of scenes
where input channel data results in misclassification of open
water. Further, this metric does not focus on misclassifications
within the MIZ; variability in mid-range concentration estimates
by ice analysts [54], and use of polygon labels at the pixel-level,
may both contribute to why models less accurately segment
these polygons (e.g., Fig. 7). This forgiveness may be useful
for considering real-world, pixel-level conditions. Specifically,
ice chart polygons are assigned a label based on the majority
ice type, and overestimation of concentration is often linked
to older/vaster SOD and FLOE. Thus, the ice type associated
with the dominant concentration may skew SIC estimates to be
higher than the total concentration, which is the sum of partial
concentrations. Ultimately, SIC accuracy is a useful metric for
evaluation, which should be used in combination with the R2
score to interpret predictions, and highlight recurring classification errors.
D. Considerations for Incorporating Thermal–Infrared
Imagery
This study highlights the potential benefits of incorporating thermal–infrared imagery in deep learning-based sea ice
mapping approaches. An 8 h acquisition window found ample
overlap between VIIRS, Sentinel-1, and AMSR2 coverage, with
models generating accurate pixel-level ice chart predictions
in combination with downscaled SAR imagery. In addition,
improvements in open-water predictions, where this data type
offers the most benefit, are less impacted by ice drift velocity.
Ultimately, the primary limitation for using this data type is pixel
cloud contamination, where filtering at the defined 60% cloud
cover threshold restricted dataset size and spatial–temporal coverage. This issue is compounded by VIIRS cloud masking,
which is more conservative at night in response to increased
uncertainty [56].
Because this study sought to evaluate the impacts of IST data,
scenes with extensive cloud cover were discarded; however,
expansion of the dataset in future work can allow a higher cloud
threshold. In this case, the model would function similarly to
current products (e.g., Ludwig et al. [9]), which use data from
passive instruments where available. Further, upcoming satellite missions offer promising advancements in thermal–infrared
products, which may reduce these limitations. For example, the
TRISHNA satellite, set to launch in 2026, will provide a spatial
resolution of 60 m and global revisit period of three days [59].
This mission provides an alternative, high-resolution product
to the existing SDGSAT-1, which has a spatial resolution of
30 m, but is limited by its 11 d revisit period [60]. Higherresolution thermal–infrared data could enhance sea ice parameter estimation near land boundaries, within inland features such
as tributaries, and capture small and medium floes. Further,
improved spatial resolution may also increase data retrieval
within cloudy regions. Although these products will not overlap
with the AI4Arctic dataset, they could complement existing

24780

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

algorithms for estimating SIC, such as those by Ludwig et al. [9]
and Konig et al. [10]. In addition, combining higher-resolution
products with SAR imagery can refine pixel-level labels of
ice conditions, enabling advancements beyond ice chart labels
and supporting the exploration of semi-supervised or transfer
learning approaches [61], [62].
Finally, previous research reports variability in multitask predictions for the open-water class, which should be consistent
across SIC, SOD, and FLOE [63]. Building on the DEU-Net-V
architecture, use of a second decoder, which accomplishes an
additional ice–water classification task, is one potential method
for improving model accuracy. A dedicated decoder would allow
the model to focus on distinguishing between the two classes.
Further, in learning shared features that are useful for both icewater classification and sea ice parameter estimation, the model
may learn better feature representations that improve model
accuracy and generalization. Alternatively, the second decoder
could classify open-water, marginal ice, and consolidated ice,
in line with the SIC accuracy classes. In addition to improving
ice-water classification, this approach has the potential to reduce
misclassification of marginal ice as consolidated ice. Exploration of these alternative architectures have the capability to
further leverage the improvements seen from incorporating IST
measurements.
VII. CONCLUSION
This study investigated the impacts of applying thermal infrared data to multitask sea ice parameter estimation, using
input- and feature-level fusion approaches. Ultimately, DEUNet-V, a novel dual-encoder U-Net architecture, was found to
reduce classification errors resulting from ambiguous or inaccurate surface measurements form SAR and PM sensors. Learning
the salient features of VIIRS IST measurements separately
from Sentinel-1 SAR, AMSR2 PM, and ERA5 reanalysis data,
was found to improve predictive accuracy relative to networks
learning the combined features of all inputs, or grouping input
channels based on resolution.
Analysis leveraged evaluation metrics and predicted sea ice
maps of SIC, SOD, and floe size for an 84-scene subset of the
AI4Arctic dataset. These maps were compared to ice charts from
the Canadian and Greenland Ice Services, acting as labels. Four
models were evaluated against the winning AI4EO AutoICE
Challenge architecture, which acts as an AI4Arctic baseline. A
SIC accuracy metric was also introduced to provide an additional
assessment of model performance.
The study found that while learning common features between SAR and IST channels did improve model predictions,
regions where SAR data is ambiguous and IST measurements
are masked due to cloud contamination negated the predictive
gains. In addition, comparison of architectures leveraging shared
versus task specific decoders demonstrated that architectures
with a single decoder, such as DEU-Net-V, benefited from
improved contextual awareness across parameters. Conversely,
multidecoder architectures inconsistently predict shared classes,
but can effectively reconstruct task-specific features. Results
demonstrate that models incorporating IST consistently reduce

classification errors across all three tasks, particularly when
identifying open water under conditions with low-incidence angle (SAR), high atmospheric moisture (PM), and wind roughening (SAR and PM). Further, inference, which evaluated models
on the months of November through May, demonstrated these
improvements under a range of freeze-up and break-up/early
melt conditions. These findings support the continued development of deep learning approaches incorporating IST, and
highlight the potential for next-generation thermal–infrared instruments to further improve automated sea ice mapping.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the
University of Waterloo for the support.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Meier et al., “Sea ice: Arctic report card 2023,” National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Tech. Rep., 2023.
[2] G. Boutin, T. Williams, P. Rampal, E. Olason, and C. Lique, “Impact of
wave-induced sea ice fragmentation on sea ice dynamics in the MIZ,”
Copernicus GmbH, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[3] N. Melia, K. Haines, and E. Hawkins, “Sea ice decline and 21st century
trans-arctic shipping routes,” Geophysical Res. Lett., vol. 43, no. 18,
pp. 9720–9728, 2016.
[4] L. Beaulieu et al., “Indigenous self-determination in cryospheric science:
The Inuit-led Sikumik Qaujimajjuti (”tools to know how the ice is”) program in Inuit Nunangat, Canada,” Front. Earth Sci., vol. 11, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/earth-science/articles/10.
3389/feart.2023.1076774
[5] M. Rantanen et al., “The arctic has warmed nearly four times faster than
the globe since 1979,” Commun. Earth Environ., vol. 3, 2022.
[6] J. Eamer et al., “Life linked to ice: A guide to sea-ice-associated biodiversity in this time of rapid change,” Conservation of Arctic Flora Fauna,
Iceland, Tech. Rep. 10, 2013.
[7] Y. Liu, J. R. Key, X. Wang, and M. Tschudi, “Multidecadal Arctic sea
ice thickness and volume derived from ice age,” Cryosphere, vol. 14,
pp. 1325–1345, 2020.
[8] C. Melsheimer and G. Spreen, “AMSR2 ASI Sea Ice Concentration Data,
Arctic, version 5.4 (NetCDF) (july 2012 - december 2018),” 2019.
[9] V. Ludwig, G. Spreen, and L. T. Pedersen, “Evaluation of a new merged
sea-ice concentration dataset at 1 km resolution from thermal infrared
and passive microwave satellite data in the arctic,” Remote Sens., vol. 12,
no. 19, 2020.
[10] C. König, T. König, S. Singha, A. Frost, and S. Jacobsen, “Combined use
of space borne optical and SAR data to improve knowledge about sea ice
for shipping,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 23, 2021.
[11] A. S. Komarov, A. Caya, L. Pogson, and M. Buehner, “Assimilation of
RCM data in the canadian ice concentration analysis system,” Remote
Sens. Environ., vol. 306, 2024, Art. no. 114113. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003442572400124X
[12] Environment Canada, “Manual of standard procedures for observing and
reporting ice conditions (MANICE),” 2005, issuing authority: Assistant
Deputy Minister, Meteorological Service of Canada. [Online]. Available: https://www.Canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/
weather-manuals-documentation/manice-manual-of-ice.html
[13] D. Malmgren-Hansen et al., “A convolutional neural network architecture
for sentinel-1 and AMSR2 data fusion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1890–1902, Mar. 2021.
[14] H. Boulze, A. Korosov, and J. Brajard, “Classification of sea ice types in
sentinel-1 SAR data using convolutional neural networks,” Remote Sens.,
vol. 12, no. 13, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/20724292/12/13/2165
[15] K. Radhakrishnan, K. A. Scott, and D. A. Clausi, “Sea ice concentration
estimation: Using passive microwave and SAR data with a U-net and
curriculum learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
Sens., vol. 14, pp. 5339–5351, 2021.

DE LOË et al.: FUSING IST WITH THE AI4ARCTIC DATASET FOR IMPROVED DEEP LEARNING-BASED SEA ICE MAPPING

[16] Y. Wang and X. Li, “Arctic sea ice cover data from spaceborne synthetic
aperture radar by deep learning,” Earth Syst. Sci. Data, vol. 13, no. 6,
pp. 2723–2742, 2021.
[17] A. Stokholm, T. Wulf, A. Kucik, R. Saldo, J. Buus-Hinkler, and S. M.
Hvidegaard, “AI4SeaIce: Toward solving ambiguous SAR textures in convolutional neural networks for automatic sea ice concentration charting,”
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[18] X. Chen et al., “MMSeaIce: Multi-task mapping of sea ice parameters from
AI4Arctic sea ice challenge dataset,” EGUsphere, vol. 2023, pp. 1–17,
2023.
[19] M. Rogers, M. Fox, A. Fleming, L. van Zeeland, J. Wilkinson, and J.
Hosking, “Sea ice detection using concurrent multispectral and synthetic
aperture radar imagery,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 305, 2024, Art.
no. 114073.
[20] J. Buus-Hinkler et al., “Ready-to-train AI4Arctic sea ice challenge
dataset,” 2022.
[21] S. C. Deodoro, R. de Andrade Moral, R. Fealy, T. McCarthy, and R.
Fealy, “Using the surface scattering mechanism from dual-pol SAR data
to estimate topsoil particle-sizefractions,” Int. J. Appl. Earth Observation
Geoinformation, vol. 128, 2024, Art. no. 103742. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1569843224000967
[22] J. Chi, H. cheol Kim, S. Lee, and M. M. Crawford, “Deep learning based
retrieval algorithm for arctic sea ice concentration from AMSR2 passive
microwave and MODIS optical data,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 231,
2019, Art. no. 111204.
[23] T. Feng, X. Liu, and R. Li, “Super-resolution-aided sea ice concentration
estimation from AMSR2 images by encoder–decoder networks with atrous
convolution,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens.,
vol. 16, pp. 962–973, 2023.
[24] Q. Liu, R. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Yan, J. Xu, and Y. Guo, “Short-term
forecasting of sea ice thickness based on PredRNN,” J. Physics: Conf.
Ser., vol. 2486, no. 1, May 2023, Art. no. 0 12017.
[25] J. C. Comiso, “Sea ice effective microwave emissivities from satellite passive microwave and infrared observations,” J. Geophysical Research: Oceans, vol. 88, no. C12, pp. 7686–7704, 1983. [Online].
Available: https://agupubs-onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.lib.uwaterloo.
ca/doi/abs/10.1029/JC088iC12p07686
[26] H. Hersbach et al., “The ERA5 global reanalysis,” Quart. J. Roy. Meteorological Soc., vol. 146, no. 730, pp. 1999–2049, 2020.
[27] J. C. Comiso, W. N. Meier, and R. Gersten, “Variability and trends in the
arctic sea ice cover: Results from different techniques,” J. Geophysical
Res.: Oceans, vol. 122, no. 8, pp. 6883–6900, 2017.
[28] C. Strong, D. Foster, E. Cherkaev, I. Eisenman, and K. M. Golden, “On the
definition of marginal ice zone width,” J. Atmospheric Ocean. Technol.,
vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 1565–1584, 2017.
[29] A. R. Stokholm et al., “The autoice challenge,” EGUsphere, vol. 2023,
pp. 1–28, 2023.
[30] A. W. Bateson et al., “Sea ice floe size: Its impact on pan-arctic and
local ice mass and required model complexity,” Cryosphere, vol. 16,
no. 6, pp. 2565–2593, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://tc.copernicus.org/
articles/16/2565/2022/
[31] A. W. Bateson, D. L. Feltham, D. Schröder, L. Hosekova, J. K. Ridley, and
Y. Aksenov, “Impact of sea ice floe size distribution on seasonal fragmentation and melt of arctic sea ice,” Cryosphere, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 403–428,
2020. [Online]. Available: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/14/403/2020/
[32] K. A. Scott, M. Buehner, A. Caya, and T. Carrieres, “Direct assimilation
of amsr-e brightness temperatures for estimating sea ice concentration,”
Monthly Weather Rev., vol. 140, no. 3, pp. 997–1013, 2012. [Online].
Available: https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/mwre/140/3/mwrd-11-00014.1.xml
[33] G. J. Macdonald, R. K. Scharien, K. Duncan, S. L. Farrell, P. Rezania,
and A. Tavri, “Arctic sea ice topography information from RADARSAT
constellation mission (RCM) synthetic aperture radar (SAR) backscatter,”
Geophysical Res. Lett., vol. 51, no. 4, 2024, Art. no. e2023GL107261.
[34] L. Pogson, T. Geldsetzer, M. Buehner, T. Carrieres, M. Ross, and K. A.
Scott, “Collecting empirically derived SAR characteristic values over one
year of sea ice environments for use in data assimilation,” Monthly Weather
Rev., vol. 145, no. 1, pp. 323–334, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://
journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/mwre/145/1/mwr-d-16-0110.1.xml
[35] W. N. Meier and J. S. Stewart, “Assessing the potential of enhanced
resolution gridded passive microwave brightness temperatures for retrieval
of sea ice parameters,” Remote Sens., vol. 12, no. 16, 2020.
[36] N. Ivanova et al., “Inter-comparison and evaluation of sea ice algorithms: Towards further identification of challenges and optimal approach using passive microwave observations,” Cryosphere, vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 1797–1817, 2015.

24781

[37] K. Naoki, J. Ukita, F. Nishio, M. Nakayama, J. C. Comiso, and A.
Gasiewski, “Thin sea ice thickness as inferred from passive microwave
and in situ observations,” J. Geophysical Res.: Oceans, vol. 113, no. C2,
2008.
[38] X. Chen, R. Valencia, A. Soleymani, and K. A. Scott, “Predicting sea ice
concentration with uncertainty quantification using passive microwave and
reanalysis data: A case study in baffin bay,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 61, pp. 1–13, 2023.
[39] M. Leppäranta and J. E. Lewis, “Observations of ice surface temperature and thickness in the baltic sea,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 28,
no. 17, pp. 3963–3977, 2007. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/
01431160601075616
[40] T. Zeng, L. Shi, M. Mäkynen, and J. Zhang, “Sea ice thickness analyses for
the Bohai sea using MODIS thermal infrared imagery,” Acta Oceanologica
Sinica, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 96–104, May 2016. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s13131-016-0908-8
[41] D. K. Hall and G. A. Riggs., “MODIS/aqua sea ice extent 5-min L2 swath
1 km, version 61,” 2021.
[42] G. Riggs, M. Tschudi, and D. K. Hall, “VIIRS/NPP ice surface temperature
6-min L2 swath 750 m, version 1,” 2017.
[43] L. de Loë, L. Xu, and K. A. Scott, “Fusing ice surface temperature with
the AI4Arctic dataset for enhanced sea ice concentration estimation: A
preliminary assessment,” in Proc. OCEANS 2024-Halifax. IEEE, 2024,
pp. 1–9.
[44] L. Wang, K. A. Scott, L. Xu, and D. A. Clausi, “Sea ice concentration
estimation during melt from dual-pol SAR scenes using deep convolutional
neural networks: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54,
no. 8, pp. 4524–4533, Aug. 2016.
[45] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” 2015.
[46] A. Kucik and A. Stokholm, “AI4SeaIce: Comparing loss representations
for SAR sea ice concentration charting,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop AI
Earth Sci., 2022. [Online]. Available: https://ai4earthscience.github.io/
iclr-2022-workshop/accepted
[47] A. Kucik and A. Stokholm, “AI4SeaIce: Selecting loss functions for
automated SAR sea ice concentration charting,” Sci. Rep., vol. 13, 2023.
[48] A. Stokholm, A. Kucik, N. Longépé, and S. M. Hvidegaard,
“AI4SeaIce: Task separation and multistage inference CNNs for automatic sea ice concentration charting,” EGUsphere, vol. 2023, pp. 1–25,
2023.
[49] A. Mahbod, G. Schaefer, G. Dorffner, S. Hatamikia, R. Ecker, and I.
Ellinger, “A dual decoder U-net-based model for nuclei instance segmentation in hematoxylin and eosin-stained histological images,” Front. Med.,
vol. 9, 2022.
[50] L. M. Pereira, A. Salazar, and L. Vergara, “A comparative study on recent
automatic data fusion methods,” Computers, vol. 13, no. 1, 2024.
[51] L. Wang, K. A. Scott, and D. A. Clausi, “Improved sea ice concentration
estimation through fusing classified SAR imagery and AMSR-E data,”
Can. J. Remote Sens., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 41–52, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/07038992.2016.1152547
[52] A. Korosov, D. Demchev, N. Miranda, N. Franceschi, and J.-W. Park,
“Thermal denoising of cross-polarized sentinel-1 data in interferometric
and extra wide swath modes,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
pp. 1–11, 2022.
[53] C. Soriot, C. Prigent, C. Jimenez, and F. Frappart, “Arctic sea ice thickness
estimation from passive microwave satellite observations between 1.4 and
36 GHz,” Earth Space Sci., vol. 10, no. 2, 2023, Art. no. e2022EA002542.
[54] A. Cheng, B. Casati, A. Tivy, T. Zagon, J.-F. Lemieux, and L. B. Tremblay, “Accuracy and inter-analyst agreement of visually estimated sea ice
concentrations in canadian ice service ice charts using single-polarization
RADARSAT-2,” Cryosphere, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1289–1310, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/14/1289/2020/
[55] J. Key, J. A. Maslanik, T. Papakyriakou, M. C. Serreze, and A. J.
Schweiger, “On the validation of satellite-derived sea ice surface temperature,” Arctic, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 280–287, 1994. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40511576
[56] M. A. Tschudi, G. A. Riggs, D. K. Hall, and M. O. Román, “SuomiNPP VIIRS ice surface temperature algorithm theoretical basis document (ATBD),” NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD,
Tech. Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available: https://viirsland.gsfc.nasa.gov/
PDF/VIIRS_IST_ATBD_V1.pdf
[57] S. Andersen, R. Tonboe, L. Kaleschke, G. Heygster, and L. T. Pedersen,
“Intercomparison of passive microwave sea ice concentration retrievals
over the high-concentration arctic sea ice,” J. Geophysical Res.: Oceans,
vol. 112, no. C8, 2007. [Online]. Available: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2006JC003543

24782

IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 18, 2025

[58] C. Horvat, E. Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, and A. Petty, “Observing waves
in sea ice with ICESat-2,” Geophysical Res. Lett., vol. 47, no. 10, 2020.
[59] T. H. Vidal, P. Gamet, A. Olioso, and F. Jacob, “Optimizing TRISHNA
TIR channels configuration for improved land surface temperature and
emissivity measurements,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 272, 2022, Art.
no. 112939. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0034425722000530
[60] H. Guo et al., “The sdgsat-1 mission and its role in monitoring SDG
indicators,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 328, 2025, Art. no. 114885.
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0034425725002895
[61] M. Jiang, X. Chen, L. Xu, and D. A. Clausi, “Semi-supervised sea ice
classification of SAR imagery based on graph convolutional network,” in
IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp., 2022, pp. 1031–1034.
[62] Y. Liu, Z. Huang, and J. Han, “Aleatoric uncertainty embedded transfer
learning for sea-ice classification in SAR images,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp., 2022, pp. 4980–4983.
[63] F. J. Pena Cantu et al., “A hierarchical multitask u-net for automated sea
ice mapping from AI4Arctic sea ice challenge dataset,” in Proc. OCEANS
2023 - MTS/IEEE U. S. Gulf Coast, 2023, pp. 1–7.

Lily de Loë (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.A.Sc. degree in engineering physics from Queen’s
University, Kingston, ON, Canada, in 2023, and the
M.A.Sc. degree in systems design engineering from
the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada,
in 2025.
Her research interests focus on applying deep
learning approaches to geospatial data, with an emphasis on sea ice remote sensing.

David A. Clausi (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in systems design engineering from
the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada,
in 1996.
He is currently a Professor in systems design engineering with the University Research Chair, University of Waterloo (Canada), who specializes in the field
of Intelligent Systems. After the Ph.D., he worked in
medical imaging with Mitra Imaging (Waterloo). He
started his academic career in 1997 as an Assistant
Professor in geomatics engineering with the University of Calgary, Calgary, AB. Canada.
Dr. Clausi was the Associate Dean – Research & External Partnerships in
the Faculty of Engineering (2018–2024). He has many contributions, conducting research primarily in remote sensing, computer vision, image processing,
sports analytics, and algorithm design. He was the Co-chair of IAPR Technical
Committee 7 – Remote Sensing. He has authored or coauthored extensively,
has been an Associate Editor for leading journals, received many scholarships,
paper awards, research awards, teaching excellence awards and his efforts have
led to successful commercial implementations, culminating in the creation and
sale of a tech company. He is a Professional Engineer (Ontario), Fellow of
the Canadian Academy of Engineering, Fellow of the Asia-Pacific Artificial
Intelligence Association, and Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada.

K. Andrea Scott (Member, IEEE) received the
B.A.Sc. degree from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1999, the M.A.Sc. degree
from McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada,
in 2001, and the Ph.D. degree from the University
of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2008, all in
mechanical engineering.
She was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the Data
Assimilation and Satellite Meteorology Research
Section, Environment and Climate Change Canada,
Toronto, ON, Canada, in 2008, where she was part
of a team involved in the development of a sea ice data assimilation system.
In 2012, she joined the Department of Systems Design Engineering, University
of Waterloo, moving to the Department of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering in 2023. She works on remote sensing, deep learning, and computational
fluids.

